Cockpit 332 (#782)
cockpit-project/cockpit-project.github.io: _posts/2025-01-29-cockpit-332.md

---
title: Cockpit 332
author: jelle
date: '2025-01-29'
tags: cockpit, machines, podman, files
slug: cockpit-332
category: release
summary: 'package-less session support for more operation systems, show system boot times in metrics, automatically start podman.socket and improve quadlet support in cockpit-podman, show user group in files footer'
---

Cockpit is the [modern Linux admin interface](https://cockpit-project.org/).
We release regularly.

Here are the release notes from Cockpit 332, cockpit-machines 327, cockpit-podman 100, and cockpit-files 15:

## cockpit/ws container: Include cockpit-files

> The [cockpit/ws container](https://quay.io/repository/cockpit/ws) now includes [cockpit-files](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit-files/). When you log into a remote machine that does not have any cockpit packages installed (package-less mode), the "Files" page is now available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [cockpit/ws container](https://quay.io/repository/cockpit/ws) now includes [cockpit-files](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit-files/). When you log into a remote machine that does not have any Cockpit packages installed (package-less mode), the "Files" page is now available.
```

This needs to either be "Cockpit" or `cockpit` here... either it's Cockpit packages (as in packages related to Cockpit) or `cockpit` packages (as in packages that contain the name `cockpit`).

## Package-less session for all supported operating systems

[Cockpit 327](https://cockpit-project.org/blog/cockpit-327.html) introduced support for connecting to remote machines without any installed Cockpit packages. That only worked if the local and remote machine had the same operating system version. This version extends this "package-less session" feature to all operating systems which Cockpit [continuously tests](https://cockpit-project.org/running.html#installation--setup). At the time of writing this includes:

  * Arch Linux
  * CentOS Stream 9, 10
  * Debian 12, testing/unstable
  * Fedora Linux 40, 41, 42 (rawhide)
  * Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8, 9, 10
  * Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, 24.04 LTS, 24.10

> This list will change over time, along with new operating system releases and their end-of-lives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This list will change over time, due to new distribution releases and the end of support for each version.
```

> ## Show system boot in metrics
> 
> ![screenshot of ## show system boot in metrics]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/332-show-system-boot-in-metrics.png)

Reviewer: We should say where this is, and I guess metrics is under "overview".

```suggestion
## Overview: Show system boot in metrics

![screenshot of ## show system boot in metrics]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/332-show-system-boot-in-metrics.png)
```

## Machines: "Launch viewer" now uses correct address

> The "Launch viewer" button in the "Console" card of a virtual machine now connects to the domain name or IP address that Cockpit itself is using to reach the virtual machine host. This resolves issues when the libvirt default listen address is changed to allow connections on all interfaces.

Reviewer: Minor word adjustments, taking in feedback from @mvollmer too:

```suggestion
The "Launch viewer" button in a virtual machine's "Console" card now uses the same address that Cockpit uses to connect to the virtual machine host. This resolves connection issues that can occur when libvirt's default listen address is changed to allow connections on all interfaces. Previously, the button incorrectly attempted to connect to the local machine where the browser is running.
```

> The "Launch viewer" button in a virtual machine's "Console" card now uses the same address that Cockpit uses to connect to the virtual machine host. This resolves connection issues that can occur when libvirt's default listen address is changed to allow connections on all interfaces. Previously, the button incorrectly attempted to connect to the local machine where the browser is running.

Reviewer 2: My attempt:

> The "Launch viewer" button in a virtual machine's "Console" card now uses the same address that Cockpit uses to connect to the virtual machine host. Previously, the button incorrectly attempted to connect to either the local machine where the browser is running (when the listening address was set to "localhost") or 
to an invalid "0.0.0.0" address (when VNC was configured to listen to all interfaces).

> The "Launch viewer" button in the "Console" card of a virtual machine would tell the remote viewer application to connect to the listening address of the VNC server. This is wrong when the server listens on 127.0.0.1 (libvirt default) or 0.0.0.0 (allow connections on all interfaces). Now Cockpit will tell the remote viewer application to connect to the same domain name or IP address that Cockpit itself is using to reach the virtual machine host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Launch viewer" button in the "Console" card of a virtual machine would tell the remote viewer application to connect to the listening address of the VNC server. This is problematic when the server listens on 127.0.0.1 (libvirt default) or 0.0.0.0 (allow connections on all interfaces). To address this, Cockpit will now tell the remote viewer application to connect to the same domain name or IP address that Cockpit itself uses to reach the virtual machine host.
```

Author: I'm going to simplify this, it is too technical:

> can we just change the release note to say that we connect directly to the domain name or IP of the virtual machine host which resolves issues when someone has configured VNC/SPICE to listen to on interfaces. Note that when listening to 127.0.0.1 cockpit-machines cannot display the vnc/spice console
the current release note is rather technical and claims [localhost](http://localhost/) works

## Podman: Automatically start podman.socket

> If `podman.socket` is not already running on the system or user session, cockpit-podman will now automatically start the unit.  It is no longer necessary to manually start or enable the podman service."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `podman.socket` is not already running on the system or user session, cockpit-podman will now automatically start the unit.  It is no longer necessary to manually start or enable the podman service.
```
Stray " at the end.

> If the system or user's `podman.socket` unit isn't running, cockpit-podman now silently starts it on its own, instead of asking the user about it. There is no need to have the service enabled (i.e. always start it on boot or user login) for cockpit-podman any more.

Reviewer: We can probably trim this down a bit:

```suggestion
If `podman.socket` is not already running on the system or user session, cockpit-podman will now automatically start the unit.  It is no longer necessary to manually start or enable the podman service."
```

(It doesn't mention cockpit-podman bugging someone about starting it, like it did before... but that's kind of covered under manually starting it too.)

> ## Podman: Improve quadlet compatibility
> 
> Podman quadlets are now visually identified by a `service` label in the containers overview and the rename a container option is now also hidden for quadlets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Podman: Improve quadlet compatibility

Container-based services (aka: "quadlets") are now labeled with a "service" badge in the containers overview. Additionally, the option to rename quadlets has been removed, as renaming must take place in the systemd service `.container` file, which are often found in `/etc/containers/systemd/`.
```

---
title: Cockpit 332
author: jelle
date: '2025-01-29'
tags: cockpit, machines, podman, files
slug: cockpit-332
category: release
summary: 'packagless session support for more operation systems, show system boot times in metrics, automatically start podman.socket and improve quadlet support in cockpit-podman, show user group in files footer'
---

Cockpit is the [modern Linux admin interface](https://cockpit-project.org/).
We release regularly.

Here are the release notes from Cockpit 332, cockpit-machines 327, cockpit-podman 100, and cockpit-files 15:

## cockpit/ws container: Include cockpit-files

> The [cockpit/ws container](https://quay.io/repository/cockpit/ws) now includes [cockpit-files](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit-files/). When you log into a remote machine that does not have any cockpit packages installed (package-less mode), the "Files" page is now available.

Reviewer 2: The next release note calls this "packageless session". Let's make both of these consistent, with "package-less session"?

Author: Sure

  * Arch Linux
  * CentOS Stream 9, 10
  * Debian 12, testing/unstable
  * Fedora Linux 40, 41, 42 (rawhide)
  * Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8, 9, 10
  * Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, 24.04 LTS, 24.10

This list will change over time, along with new operating system releases and their end-of-lives.

## Show system boot in metrics

![screenshot of ## show system boot in metrics]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/332-show-system-boot-in-metrics.png)

## Machines: "Launch viewer" now uses correct address

The "Launch viewer" button in the "Console" card of a virtual machine would tell the remote viewer application to connect to the listening address of the VNC server. This is wrong when the server listens on 127.0.0.1 (libvirt default) or 0.0.0.0 (allow connections on all interfaces). Now Cockpit will tell the remote viewer application to connect to the same domain name or IP address that Cockpit itself is using to reach the virtual machine host.

> 

Reviewer 2: This should probably point out that this still won't work if the server only listens on localhost, but at least the error message makes more sense then.

Reviewer 3: > "This resolves issues when the libvirt default is changed to allow connections on all interfaces"

There are also issues when the default is not changed: the remote viewer will incorrectly try to connect to the machine that runs the browser.

## Podman: Automatically start podman.socket

If the system or user's `podman.socket` unit isn't running, cockpit-podman now silently starts it on its own, instead of asking the user about it. There is no need to have the service enabled (i.e. always start it on boot or user login) for cockpit-podman any more.

## Podman: Improve quadlet compatibility

> Podman quadlet's are now visually identified by a `service` label in the containers overview and the rename a container option is now also hidden for quadlets.

Reviewer 2: "quadlets" without apostrophe (plural, not possessive). Let's also split the sentence in two, it's too long without any interpunction.

> ![screenshot of improve quadlet compatibility]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/332-podman-improve-quadlet-compatibility.png)

Reviewer 2: of improve*d*

Author: Shall we also change the title to `Improved` then?

Reviewer 2: No, our titles generally have a verb, that's fine.

## Files: Show user:group in the footer

The footer now shows the user and group of the current directory.

![screenshot of group in the footer]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/332-files-show-user-group-in-the-footer.png)

## Try it out

Cockpit 332, cockpit-machines 327, cockpit-podman 100, and cockpit-files 15 are available now:

* [For your Linux system](https://cockpit-project.org/running.html)
* [Cockpit Client](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.cockpit_project.CockpitClient)

* [Cockpit Source Tarball](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/releases/tag/332)

> * [Cockpit Fedora 41](https://bodhi.fedoraproject.org/updates/?releases=F41&packages=cockpit)

Reviewer 2: standard reminder thread: update URLs as packages become available on bodhi.

Author: Yup, just done but bodhi update for cockpit-machines F40 is missing
